Extract from  'Protocols for X/Open PC Internetworking: SMB, Version 2'
X/Open CAE Specification (1992).
 
 
Appendix D
 
SMB Encryption Techniques
 
D.1 SMB Authentication
 
The SMB authentication scheme is based upon the server knowing a
particular encrypted form of the users password, the client system
constructing that same encrypted form based upon user input, and the
client passing that encrypted form in a secure fashion to the server so
that it can verify the clients knowledge.
 
The scheme uses the DES encryption function in block mode; that is,
there is a function E(K,D) which accepts a 7 byte key (K) and 8-byte
data block (D) and produces an 8-byte encrypted data block as its
value. If the data to be encrypted is longer than 8 bytes, the
encryption function is applied to each block of 8 bytes in sequence and
the results appended together. If the key is longer than 7 bytes, the
data is first completely encrypted using the first 7 bytes of the key,
then the second 7 bytes, etc., appending the results each time. In
other words:
 
        E(K0 K1, D0 D1) = E(K0,D0)E(K0,D1)E(K1,D0)E(K1D1)
 
D.1.1 SMB negprot response
 
The SMBnegprot response field smb_crtpykey is the result of computing:
 
        C8 = E(P7,S8)
 
where:
        P7 is a 7 byte string which is non-repeating. This is usually a
        combination of the time (in seconds since January 1, 1970) and
        a counter which is incremented after each use.
 
        S8 is an 8-byte string whose value is ???????? (eight question marks).
 
D.1.2 SMBtcon, SMBtconX, SMBsesssetupX Requests
 
The client system may send an encrypted password in any one of these
requests. The server must validate that encrypted password by
performing the same computations the client did to create it, and
ensuring the strings match. The server must compute :
 
        P16 = E(P14,S8)
 
and:
 
        P24 = E(P21,C8)
 
where:
        P14 is a 14-byte string containing the users password in
        cleartest, padded with spaces.
 
        S8 is the 8-byte well-known string (see above).
 
        P21 is a 21-byte string obtained by appending 5 null (0) bytes
        to the string P16, just computed.
 
        C8 is the value of smb_cyptkey send in the SMBnegprot response
        for this connection.
 
The final string, P24, should be compared to the encrypted string in
the request :
 
        the smb_passwd field in SMBtcon
 
        the smb_spasswd field in SMBtconX
 
        the smb_apasswd field in SMBsessetupX
 
If they do not match, it is possible the client system was incapable of
encryption; if so, the string should be the users password in
cleartest. The server should try to validate the strin, treating is as
the users unencrypted password. If this validation fails as well, the
password (and the request) should be rejected.
 

